# PRINCE2 (PRojects IN Controlled Environments)
is a structured project management method.
PRINCE2 emphasises dividing projects into manageable and controllable
stages.

  7 Themes
  7 Principles

The principles are the foundations upon which everything else in the
methodology is based.

  1. Continued business justification
     Benefits tolerance - he mandate should identify the threshold of
     profit that determines the viability of the business case.
     Update stage-by-stage - broken down into stages, for ease of
     manageability.
     Checking ongoing viability - by each stage.
     Premature closure
     Benefits are not always financial

  2. Learn from experience
     Remain alert to lessons
     Project manager’s responsibility - identify, document and
     disseminate lessons.
     Lessons log - lessons learned from previous projects.
     Auditing - proof that steps have been taken to avoid repeating
     previous mistakes.
     Hiring based upon lessons
     Lessons repository

  3. Defined roles and responsibilities
     A lack of clear leadership is a common cause of project failure.
     Levels of management - three levels.
     Project board
     Stakeholders - three stakeholder interests: business, user and
     supplier.

  4. Manage by stages
     Each stage of a project must be properly planned, monitored, and
     controlled.
     Minimum of two stages.
     Initiation stage
     Project initiation documentation (PID)
     Planning horizon
     Go/no go
     Stages are a control for the project board

  5. Manage by exception
     Tolerances are established for each project objective (time,
     cost, quality, scope, benefits and risk).
     Highlight reports - regular highlight reports keep the project
     board informed about progress.
     Only if a tolerance level is forecast to be exceeded (known as an
     ‘exception’ in PRINCE2), does the project board address the issue
     through the assessment of an exception report.
     Project tolerances
     Stage tolerances
     Work package tolerances
     Benefits of "managing by exception" - he project board ‘manages
     by exception’ i.e. only gets involved when key decisions need to
     be taken.

  6. Focus on products
     Product-based planning - Product-based planning is a crucial
     aspect of the PRINCE2 approach to managing projects.
     Product descriptions - The agreed products define the project’s
     scope, as well as providing a foundation for planning and control
     activities.

  7. Tailor to suit the project
     Tailoring whilst remaining compliant
     Even on a small project, you will need to address risk, quality
     and change control. If the method is changed too much, you will
     be in danger of running a ‘PINO’ (that’s ‘PRINCE2 In Name Only’)
     project.
     Tailoring goals

The simple test whether the project is applying all 7 of the PRINCE2
principles and whether the project is applying the minimum
requirements of the 7 themes proves that the project is managed by the
PRINCE2 methodology.

Retrieved from this web site:
https://www.knowledgetrain.co.uk/project-management/prince2/prince-2-course/prince2-principles

------
Prince 2 Themes:
From this URL:
https://www.knowledgetrain.co.uk/project-management/prince2/prince-2-course/prince2-themes

There are 7 PRINCE 2 Themes:

  1. Business Case
     The purpose of this theme is to put in place mechanisms which
     assists the senior decision makers to decide whether the project
     is (and remains) a worthwhile investment. It is the theme which
     primarily implements the ‘continued business justification’
     principle.
     - Customer-supplier environment
     - Executive
     - Outline business case
     - Outputs, outcomes and benefits
     - Senior user
     - Benefits management approach
     - Minimum requirements
     
  2. Organization
     The purpose of this theme is to define and set up a project
     management team structure which defines who is accountable and
     responsible on the project.
     - Customer organization
     - Supplier organization
     - Project board role
       - executive (from customer)
       - senior user (from customer)
       - senior supplier (from supplier organization)
     - Project assurance role
     - Project manager role
     - Team manager role
     - Change authority role
     - Project support role
     Sharing roles, Combining roles
     Stakeholders: All of the above roles form the project management
       team and they are all stakeholders on the project.
     Communication management approach - written down

     Minimum requirements:
     You must define your project's organization structure and roles
     (by ensuring all responsibilities in PRINCE2’s role descriptions
     are fulfilled). You must define your project's approach to
     communicating and engaging with stakeholders and you must produce
     and maintain the project initiation documentation (PID), and a
     communication management approach.
     
   3. Quality
     PRINCE2 defines it as 'fit for purpose'.
     Documented in the quality management approach.
     QMS - quality management system
     QA - quality assurance
     Quality Control
     Baseline - once the product is approved by the quality control, it became a
                baseline (version) and change only via a 'request for
                change'.
     Quality planning - customer's quality expectations - part of high level
                        business requirements
     Acceptance methods - creted acceptance records by different stakeholders.
     Quality register - where quality records are maintained.

     Minimum requirements:
     -> quality management approach
     You must specify explicit quality criteria for products and
     maintain appropriate quality records.
     -> quality register
     The customer’s quality expectations and prioritized acceptance
     criteria must be specified in a project product description and
     you must use lessons to inform quality planning on the project.
     
   4. Plans
     The purpose of this theme is to define how, when, for how much,
     by whom and where the project will deliver products.
     Levels of plan
     
      1. project plan - project board - containing project levels
                        costs, timescales and control points
      2. stage plan - roject manager - for day-to-day management of the project
      3. team plan - team manager – covers all the work done by a team
     Exception plans
     Budgets - 1. fund to cover the product
               2. risk budget
	       3. change budget
	       4. cost tolerance
     Product-based planning:
               1. Writing a project product description
	       2. Creating a product breakdown structure
	       3. Writing product descriptions
	       4. Creating a product flow diagram
     Planning stages:
     - the planning horizon, delivery steps, level of risk

     Minimum requirements:
     You must have at least two management stages.
     You must produce and maintain a project plan and stage plan.
     You must use product-based planning when creating all plans.
     You must create and maintain a
         project product description,
	 product description for each product
	 product breakdown structure

   5. Risk
     Risk is defined as an uncertain event, which (if it occurs) will
     have an effect (either negative or positive) on the project’s
     objectives.
     If and when a risk does actually occur then it becomes a project
     issue.
     Two sort: THREAD or OPPORTUNITY

     Risk appetite -
     Risk budget -
     Risk tolerance -
     Risk management procedure - risk register,
                                 risk management approach - 5 steps:
				    1. Identify
				    2. Assess
				    3. Plan
				    4. Implement
				    5. Communicate
     Risk responses:
        Threads:
	   1. Avoid
	   2. Reduce
	   3. Accept
	   4. Transfer
	   5. Share
	   6. Prepare contingent plans
	Opportunities:
	   1. Exploit
	   2. Enhance
	   3. Reject
	   4. Transfer
	   5. Share
	   6. Prepare contingent plans

      Minimum requirements:
      You must define a risk management approach.
      You must maintain some form of risk register.

   6. Change
     The purpose is to identify, analyse and control any potential and
     approved changes to baseline products.

     Baseline:
     A baseline refers to a product which has undergone its quality
     controls, has been deemed ‘fit for purpose’ and has been approved
     by those with authority.
     Project issues:
      - Request for Change (RFC)
      - Off-specification
      - Problems/concerns
     Exceptions
     Managing issues - e.g. issues get recorded in the daily log
     Change control procedure:
        1. Capture
	2. Examine
	3. Propose
	4. Decide
	5. Implement
     Change authority
     Configuration item records - used to identify version of the product.

     Minimum requirements:
     You must define a change control approach.
     The approach will also define how product baselines are created,
     maintained and controlled.
     You must maintain some form of issue register.
     
   7. Progress
     The purpose is to put in place mechanisms (controls) to monitor
     and compare what has actually happened on the project against
     what should have happened.

     Progress control:
       - delegating authority from one level of management to the level below
       - dividing the project into management stages
       - time-driven and event-driven progress
       - raising exceptions  
     The project’s controls should be documented in the project
     initiation documentation (PID).

     Tolerances
     Escalate if beyond tolerance
     Types of progress control:
        Time-driven controls
	Event-driven controls
     Examples of event-driven controls:
        Work package
	Lessons log
	Lessons report
	End stage report
	End project report
     Project manager controls:
        Baselines: project plan, stage plan, exception plan, work package
	Reviewing progress: issue register, risk register, quality
	   register, product status account, daily log
	Capturing/reporting lessons: lessons log, lessons report
	Reporting progress: checkpoint report, highlight report, end
	   stage report, end project report

     Minimum requirements:
     You must define your project's approach to controlling progress
     in the project initiation documentation (PID).
     You must manage by stages, set tolerances and manage by exception
     against these tolerances.
     You must review the business justification when exceptions are
     raised and learn lessons throughout the project.

----
PRINCE2 Processes
From this URL:
https://www.knowledgetrain.co.uk/project-management/prince2/prince-2-course/prince2-processes

There are 7 processes in PRINCE2:

   1. Starting up a project
      “is the project viable and worthwhile?”
      - to appoint right personel
      - to ensure there is plan
      - ensure initiation phase has reasonable scope, timescales,
        acceptance criteria and constraints

      The process is about filtering out the badly-conceived projects
      from the good ones.
      The project trigger - corporate management
      Allocation of people and definition of roles.
      The executive is responsible to outline the business case.

      Two main outputs:
      - project brief
      - initiation stage plan

   2. Directing a project
      The purpose is to enable the project board to make key
      decisions and exercising overall control over the project.
      Objectives:
      - there is authority to initiate the project, deliver the project’s products, and to close the project
      - management direction and control are provided throughout the project’s life
        the project remains viable
      - corporate management has an interface to the project
      - plans for realizing the post-project benefits are managed and reviewed

      "The executive is the decision maker, project board is NOT a
      democracy"
      The senior supplier and senior user roles on the project board
      will help and support the executive to take sensible decisions.

      No need for regular meetings:
      'the project board ‘manages by exception’ (another of the principles).'
      
      The Project Board performs 5 activities:
      1. Authorize initiation – ensure that the project investment is worthwhile and notify corporate management
      2. Authorize the project – approve the project initiation documentation (PID)
      3. Authorize a stage or exception plan – review the performance
         of the current stage and approve the next stage plan (or
         exception plan)
      4. Give ad-hoc direction – review highlight reports, issue reports and exception reports
      5. Authorize project closure – review and approve the end project report (and lessons report)

   3. Initiating a project
      The purpose is to put in place the solid foundations for the management and control of the project.

      Objectives:
      To ensure there’s a common understanding of:
      - the reasons, timescales, costs, scope, major products, expected benefits, and risks
      - the quality requirements and standards
      - how baseline products will be controlled
      - the communication needs of stakeholders

      Outputs:
      Project Initiation Documenation (PID)
      - project plan
      - detailed business case
      - Communication management approach - (wih stakeholders)
      - Risk management approach
      - Quality management approach
      - Change control approach
      - Project controls
      - Tailoring

   4. Controling a stage
      The purpose is to assign work to teams, monitor the work, manage issues and risks.

      Objectives
      To ensure that:
      - the project management team is focused on delivery within the tolerances
      - risks and issues are kept under control
      - the business case is kept under review
      - the agreed products are delivered to the stated quality standards, within agreed cost, effort, time constraints
      - progress is reported to the project board (highlight reports)
      - tolerance threats escalated via exception reports

      Covers the day to day project manager’s work
      Focusing on delivery:
         The process focuses on the delivery of the stage’s products.
         The project manager allocates work to teams (managed by a team manager) via work packages.
      Monitoring the team’s work:
         Once the work is under way, the team manager sends regular
         checkpoint reports to the project manager.
      Reporting progress
         Throughout the stage, the project manager sends regular
         highlight reports to the project board.
      Managing issues and risks
         For any proposed requests for change the project manager
         considers the impact the change will have on the project plan.

   5. Managing product delivery
      The purpose is to control the link between the customer and
      supplier by placing formal requirements on the team manager for
      the work to be done.

      Objectives
      To ensure that:
      - work on products allocated to the team is authorized and agreed
      - team managers and suppliers are clear as to what is to be
        produced and what is the expected effort, cost or timescales
      - the planned products are delivered to expectations and within tolerance
      - accurate progress information is provided to the project
        manager at an agreed frequency to ensure that expectations are
        managed.

      Team manager
      Work packages
      Reporting progress
      Escalation - project issue or exception report

   6. Managing a stage boundary
      The purpose is to provide the project board with an updated view
      of the project so it can review the achievements of the current
      stage.

      Objectives
      - To assure the project board that all products in the current
        stage plan have been completed and approved
      - to prepare the next stage plan
      - to review and, if necessary, update the PID
      - to provide the information needed for the project board to
        assess the continuing viability of the project
      - to record any information or lessons that can help later
        stages of this project and/or other projects
      - to request authorization to start the next stage
      - in an exception situation to prepare an exception plan and
        seek approval to replace the project plan or stage plan for
        the current stage with the exception plan

      End stage assesment
      Updates
       -> business case
       -> project plan
       -> risk register
       -> exception plan
       -> exception report
       -> lessons report

   7. Closing a project
      The purpose is to provide a fixed point at which it is confirmed
      that acceptance for the project product has been obtained.

      Objectives
      - to verify user acceptance of the project’s products has been
        obtained - this requires that the project’s acceptance
        criteria have been met
      - to ensure the host site(s) is able to support the products
        when they go operational
      - to review project’s performance against its baselines
      - to assess any benefits already been realized, update the
        forecast for the remaining benefits, and plan for a review of
        all unrealized benefits
      - to ensure provision has been made to address all open issues
        and risks with follow-on action recommendations

      Handover prodcuts
      Benefits of formal closure
      Follow-on actions     
       -> It is common to find at the end of a project a number or
          things which perhaps were never completed – e.g. requests
          for change which never got implemented, or there might be
          operational risks.
          -> end project report

      Lessons
      Notification to stakeholders -> project closure notification
      Moving into operational use
      Post project -> benefits management approach


      
